# Arrays-n-ArrayLists
Assignment completed for CSC 262: Programming in Java

Arrays and array lists have similar functionality, but have key differences that programmers must think about before employing one or the other in a program. The main difference between the two is an array size must be known at compile time, and cannot contain more elements than the size determined when implemented. One may think of this as a limitation, but to others an advantage in comparison to array lists. Since the size is known beforehand, enough space is allocated to ensure the array can hold the appropriate number of elements within itself which saves on memory. If a programmer needed to expand an array, they must create a new array to fit more elements; this can be done by multiplying the original array size by two, then using that value as the new array size.

Array lists on the other hand may grow or shrink at any moment and is not held by a size limit at compile time. Where arrays allocated memory according to the element type and size, an array lists’ size is unknown and therefore the program must allocate more memory to meet the needs of the array list. In some applications memory is scarce, so an array list may not be the preferred method in those applications. Another advantage array lists have is they have methods for removing and inserting elements as opposed to arrays which require the programmer to code those tasks into their program. In general, array lists are easier to use than arrays.

Both arrays and array lists have their place in modern applications, but their pros and cons must be weighed before implementation. Years ago, memory was a prime concern when creating applications, and even though now memory is less of an issue, it is still something a programmer must be wary of regardless of the memory available.
